1. Researchers interested in the effects of insectivorous birds on tree seedling performance in a forest stake out ten 1 m$^2$ plots and use a wire-mesh cage to cover half of each plot ^[Giffard, B., Corcket, E., Barbaro, L., & Jactel, H. (2012). Bird predation enhances tree seedling resistance to insect herbivores in contrasting forest habitats. Oecologia, 168(2), 415-424]. The cage allows insect herbivores into the seedlings inside but excludes insectivorous birds that eat the insects from the seedlings. In every plot, five seedlings are planted within the exclosure and five outside of the exclosure. At the end of the experiment, the total leaf mass is measured on each seedling. Small, uncontrolled, environmental factors (including soil factors and density of insectivorous birds) will differ between plots but will be common to all seedlings within a plot and we would expect a common response to this uncontrolled variation on top of the differential response to each treatment. As a consequence, the ten measures of leaf mass within a plot are not independent.
2. A nutrition researcher wants to compare the effect of glucose vs. fructose on glucose metabolism in humans. Ten individuals are recruited. Each individual has blood insulin measured 60 minutes after a noon meal over six successive days. The meal alternates between high glucose and high fructose on each day. Each individual has three measures under high glucose treatment and three measures under high fructose treatment. Small, uncontrolled, environmental factors (including metabolic variation, other meals, activity levels) will differ between the individuals but be common within an individual and we would expect a common response to this uncontrolled variation on top of the differential response to each treatment. As a consequence, the six measures of insulin within an individual are not independent.
3. A researcher is using a mouse model to compare growth of a wildtype and engineered mutant strain of *Staphylococcus*. A small spot on both right and left forelimbs of ten mice is shaved and abraded. The two strains are randomly assigned to a side (so each mouse is infected with each strain). Small, uncontrolled, environmental factors (including immune responses) will differ between the mice but be common between the two limbs within a mouse and we would expect a common response to this uncontrolled variation on top of the differential response to each treatment. As a consequence, the two measures of growth within a mouse are not independent.
4. An ecologist wants to measure the effect of an invasive plant on the reproduction of a native plant. They stake-out ten 2 m$^2$ plots in a forest and divide each plot into four quadrants, with each quadrant assigned a different treatment: control, activated carbon (a procedural control), extract from the invasive plant's leaves, and both activated carbon and extract from the invasive plant's leaves. The response is seedling count. Small, uncontrolled, environmental factors (including soil, drainage, and light) will differ between plots but will be common to all four quadrants within a plot and we would expect a common response to this uncontrolled variation on top of the differential response to each treatment. As a consequence, the four sets of counts within a plot are not independent.
5. An ecologist wants to measure the effect of habitat on chick growth in a bird. Five individuals nest in artifical nest boxes built on the boundary between the forest and a large, agricultural field. Five other individuals nest in boxes built deep in the interior of the forest. Chicks in each nest are weighed 13 days after hatching. Small, uncontrolled, environmental factors (including parenting, food availablity, temperature, etc.) will differ between the nests but be common within the nests and we would expect a common response to this uncontrolled variation on top of the differential response to each treatment. As a consequence, the measures of weight within a nest are not independent.
6. A physiologist has skeletal muscle cells growing in 5 control cultures, and 5 treated cultures. The $Y$ variable is cell diameter, which is measured in 10 cells per culture. Small, uncontrolled, environmental factors (including chemical) will differ between cultures but will be common to all cells within a culture and we would expect a common response to this uncontrolled variation on top of the differential response to each treatment. As a consequence, the ten measures of diameter within a culture are not independent.
7. A behavioral biologist wants to measure the effect of a predator fish on the preferred feeding location (open water or vegetation) of a prey fish. Ten tanks are set up with equal amounts of vegetated and unvegetated area. One-third of each tank is screened off to house a predator fish, which are added to five of the tanks. Ten prey fish are added to each tank. The response is minutes spent foraging in the open water as a fraction of total time foraging, which is measured in each fish in each tank. Small, uncontrolled, environmental factors (including temperature, water chemistry, light, and fish behavior) will differ between the tanks but be common within tanks and we would expect a common response to this uncontrolled variation on top of the differential response to each treatment. As a consequence, the ten measures of foraging of each fish within a tank are not independent.